American law generally holds the naming of a child to be the right and
responsibility of the parents, while certainly leaving open the door for
regulation of edge cases, such as "Ghoul Nipple", "Legend Belch",
"Brfxxccxxmnpcccclllmmnprxvclmnckssqlbb11116", and "". In many American states,
however, this right is abridged with reference to diacritical marks above
letters, hardly an edge case in many languages around the world. [Larson11]
investigates this in his study of American naming law, finding states with such
rules to include California, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Kansas:

## California

A handbook provided by the California Office of Vital Records instructs county
clerks that baby names may contain only "the 26 alphabetical characters of the
English language with appropriate punctuation if necessary" and that “no
pictographs, ideograms, diacritical marks” (including “é,” “ñ,” and “ç”) are
allowed" [Larson11]. It is notable that two California state parks indeed
include two such characters (Año Nuevo State Park and Montaña de Oro State
Park).

### 2014-AB-2528

A 2014 bill in the California State Assembly sponsored by Nancy Skinner
(AB-2528) attempted to rectify the situation with regards to birth certificates
and driver's licenses. The bill would have "required the State Registrar to
ensure that diacritical marks on English letters are properly recorded on birth
certificates, death certificates, certificates of fetal death, and marriage
licenses, including, but not limited to, accents, tildes, graves, umlauts, and
cedillas". This bill stalled in the Appropriations Committee when the
Departments of Public Health and Motor Vehicles, as well as the California
Secretary of State's office, predicted multi-million dollar price tags relating
to IT upgrades, noting that the DMV's software could not "even accept lower-case
letters". For this same reason the bill was opposed by the County Recorder's
Association of California.

### 2017-AB-82

The issue was resurrected in 2017 with the bill AB-82 sponsored by Jose Medina,
which actually passed both houses of the legislature but was vetoed by Governor
Brown, again because of the high price tag.

## Massachusetts

In Massachusetts, the “characters have to be on the standard american [sic]
keyboard. So dashes and apostrophes are fine, but not accent marks and the
such”. [Larson11]

## New Hampshire

"All special characters other than an apostrophe or dash" are prohibited.
[Larson11]

## Kansas

Restrictions are similar to those in Massachusetts. [Larson11]
