\maketitle
\tableofcontents
Introduction
============

This paper examines naming practices and policy in several countries
from a sociolinguistic perspective. Although naming is held to be the
prerogative of parents [@alford87], most states abridge the right to
some extent. In case of \"bizarre\" names like \"Adolf Hitler\" and
\"Ghoul Nipple\" [@larson11], overruling parental choice is a clear-cut
measure protecting child welfare. Other policies aim at controlling the
content of names to increase bureaucratic efficiency, implement
linguistic policies, or support other state goals. We will compare the
naming laws interaction with linguistic policy in four jurisdictions:
the prohibition of diacritics on birth certificates in California, case
and spelling assimilation in Latvia, the Personal Names List Iceland,
and character restrictions in People's Republic of China. We observe
that the methods and justifications for restricting names are influenced
by the country's official language policies and that individual's names
are frequently used as a venue for implementing or preventing linguistic
changes.

History and ethnography suggest that naming was traditionally a flexible
process, as people used multiple names depending on context or their
stage in life [@alford87] [@scott02]. Bureaucrats' need for \"synoptic
legibility\" drove the levelling of onomastic form under centralising
governments [@scott02]. Computerised data management by governments has
accelerated this process in the last half century. One variety of naming
policies we consider, exemplified by cases in California and China,
center on the state collection of standardised demographic and
identification information (and obliquely, the impact of computers in
maintaining this information). Modern data processing implicitly limits
the variety of names that may be accepted.

On the other hand, names can be actively used as tools to promote a
specific language within a country, as part of a comprehensive language
policy. A well-known example is Iceland's Personal Names Committee,
which determines whether a name is compatible with the Icelandic
language. Other countries like Latvia have similar regulations, which
seek to prop up the small national language by mandating its use in
names and other areas of society.

Thus we find a distinction between the policies of countries with strong
(de facto) official languages like English and Chinese, for which
language-based naming restrictions are primarily incidental and based on
a strong state apparatus. Countries with small national languages like
Icelandic and Latvian, on the other hand, aim to bolster their
languages' stability in the post-colonial era and defend against the
looming threat of global English.

Naming restrictions raise human rights concerns, even if they are
designed to support a legitimate state interest in the official
language. The cases we consider herein center on the right to privacy
recognised in the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment (in US
law) and privacy clauses in international treaties. Given the personal
character of naming, citizens may feel burdened by being forced to adopt
a new name or conversely, being denied the chance to change their name,
for the sake of administrative convenience or linguistic agendas? The
question is thus how to balance administrative efficiency with respect
for human dignity.

This study contributes a comparative analysis of naming laws and their
relations to language policy and language rights. We present background
regarding the social and administrative functions of names, as well as
the legal view on naming practices in common law and human rights,
preparing us for the review of individual case studies. We then consider
four cases from California, China, Iceland, and Latvia. The comparative
lens illuminates the fact that personal names have been politicised and
are used by governments for language management. Finally, we conclude by
considering the human rights implications of naming restrictions, which
call for the moderation of linguistic policymaking with respect for
privacy and self-determination.

Functions of names
==================

Personal names have three main functions, which @heymann11 [392] calls
*denotative*, *connotative*, and *associative*. The canonical use of
names is the denotative (or referential), as names serves as linguistic
token selecting an individual for discussion or address. Connotative and
associative information is equally present in names, as they can convey
cultural information about the named, such as nationality, ethnicity,
religion, etc, evoke a conception of the individual's personality, or
honour the legacy of a famous person or beloved ancestor. In some cases,
the two functions are opposed to one another, and a balance must be
struck between legibility and free expression.

Name standardisation
--------------------

Name-giving is a cultural universal. Ethnographers have found no society
past or present that does not name individuals [@alford87]. Naming is
thus deeply rooted as an aspect of human identity. Historians and
ethnographers tell us that preindustrial naming differs greatly from
industrialised practices. For example, Nuers in Sudan take two given
names (maternal and paternal), a ceremonial clan name, and an ox name of
a favourite domestic animal [@wardhaugh92]. Likewise, nicknames are
liberally bestowed for personal traits and accomplishments and become
widely used by community members in groups like the Giriama of Kenya
[@parkin88] [@wardhaugh92]. The notion of names providing a fixed legal
identity across time and space is not a given, as names can and do vary
greatly by context.

With bureaucratisation and industrialisation comes a need for such
fixing of the name. A mobile population and impersonal state presence
requires accurate and speedy identification of individuals. Hence
@scott02 observe that patrilineal surnames tend to arise wherever
centralisation is occurring: Qín China, Norman England, Atatürkian
Turkey. As they suggest, patrilineal surnames are perfectly suited to
state functions requiring clear identification of individuals: taxation,
conscription, and justice [@scott02 18]. In fact, the ideal name from an
administrative point-of-view is not a name at all, but a unique serial
number assigned to every person.[^1]

The point of standardising names is to produce a particular style of
knowledge about the populace, which is legible, objective, and public.
So the name can become a tracker to follow the person's movements,
marriages, kinship, and careers, with the emphasis being placed on the
individual's relation to society rather than on the individual
themselves. This is not to deny the real importance of administrative
objectives in legitimately defining the modern role of names. Since
names are the primary way of referring to other individuals, they
inherently take on a public function and as such must be legible and
usable for most people. But we should remain mindful of the individual's
traditional autonomy in naming and ensure that any abridgements thereof
by modern bureaucracies are limited and truly necessary for the public
interest.

Symbolic functions
------------------

> You see, to some people in the world, your name is everything. If I
> say my name to an elder Hawaiian (kupuna), they know everything about
> my husband's family going back many generations...just from the name.
> 502em () =0pt =0

The symbolic function of a name is the complex of information it
conveys, be it genealogical, cultural, linguistic, religious, etc. The
name is a foundational aspect of personal identity and an important
choice for parents to make in child-raising. Parents' motives in
choosing a name vary widely, but in general, baby names serve either to
express some special aspirations that parents have for the child or to
honour a particular family relationship (or celebrity), like a
grandfather or aunt [@finch08]. These two expressive aspects of naming
must themselves be balanced between what @finch08 calls individualizing
functions and connecting functions.

The individualizing aspects of naming are those aspects of a name which
make a statement on the individual themselves, including the associative
and connotative. The clearest manifestation of this is the choice of a
child's forename, although this choice clearly makes more of a statement
on the parents than the child itself: \"In selecting a name (especially
for a first-born child) parents are not only determining the personhood
of their child but are also taking a key step in defining their own new
identity as parents.\" [@finch08 718] (cf. [@heymann11 399]) Hence a
parent can name their child something \"beautiful\" like \"Isabella\" or
something \"strong\" like \"Samson\", imparting the connotations of
these names without any knowledge of the newborn's future personality.

The related function of association entails a name that is the same as
or similar to that of a person whose memory would be honoured or evoked
by use of the name. In the case above, \"Samson\" associates the name's
bearer with the biblical hero. A name like \"Adolf Hitler Campbell\"
associates one to an infamous historical figure.

Connecting functions are facets that locate the individual within larger
milieu. This takes the form of surnames, which in Anglophone societies
identify the paternal family unit to which the individual belongs. \"The
construction of a name, and its uses through a lifetime, also can embody
a sense of connectedness with family - with the parents who gave the
name, and with others in a domestic arrangement or a kin network with
whom all or part of the name is shared.\" [@finch08 711] Other
connecting functions include giving a first name after an older ancestor
connects you to a more specific family relationship or even the
linguistic or religious connotations carried within the first or last
name, which can connect a person to or set them apart from the dominant
society in which they live.

Legal perspectives
------------------

The common law tradition is relatively lax on the form of names given at
birth or adopted by adults, as it recognises the right of individuals to
adopt any name they choose, unless chosen for a fraudulent purpose
[@heymann11 403]. Moreover, a person's name choice of name need not be
approved by officials, although individuals may seek court approval for
its legitimizing value. Rather a name becomes such through its regular
use, since common law considers personal names primarily for their
denotative function, and courts will look for examples of the name used
in context to establish that it indeed carries out the denotative
function. For example, the New York Superior Court rejected a name
change from \"Anatoly Eyzenberg\" to \"Tony Eisenberg\" for a City
Council candidate who hoped to appear more American and less Russian.
The Court's decision rested on the fact that the petitioner had not
actually used the \"new name\" on any of his personal documents.
[@eisenberg03] [@heymann11 404].

Courts have a public interest in maintaining the usefulness and
legibility of names, although note that a total lack of ambiguity is
neither possible nor desirable, considering extremely common names, like
\"John Smith\". Despite common law's hands-off approach toward names,
American courts tend to intervene when the denotative aspect of a name
is inherently threatened by its content. For example, in the case of a
person named \"Adolf Hitler Campbell\", while the name indeed functions
as a reference, but \"the connotations associated with such names are so
strong that they frustrate the ability of the names to server their
denotative function\" [@heymann11 417]. Moreover, courts are reluctant
to apply state \"imprimatur\" on the name change [@heymann11 413] if the
name is overly bizarre or offensive. For example, an Ohio court denied
an application for name change to \"Santa Robert Claus\" because of the
people's \"proprietary right in the identity of Santa Claus\"
[@heymann11 419] [@handley00], while a Pennsylvania court denied \"World
Savior\", noting that \"no one has ever asked us to invoke our legal
authority to certify them as a savior of man\" [@heymann11 419]
[@bethea91].

California
==========

Introduction
------------

California occupies a grey zone between American bilingualism and
American nativism. In 2010, roughly 29% of Californians spoke Spanish
and 30% of these speakers reported speaking English \"not well\" or
\"not at all\" [@acs-lang-states]. Meanwhile, the historic significance
of Spanish and Mexican culture to the state is inscribed in countless
placenames like Los Angeles, San Francisco, and the Sierra Nevadas.
Other than Spanish, California is home to speakers of East Asian
languages like Tagalog, Chinese, Korean, and Vietnamese
[@acs-lang-states]. Yet none of these languages receive any recognition
or protection at the state level, while English is enshrined in the
state constitution as the official language of California [@ca-const].

The multilingual context of California makes one of its naming policies,
the restriction on diacritic characters by the Office of Vital Records,
particularly unpalatable to many citizens. California registrars only
accept the twenty-six letters of the English alphabet in names, meaning
that no diacritic characters like \"á\", \"é\", or \"ñ\" are legally
recognised. The ubiquity of Spanish names like José and María containing
such characters and the state's large Hispanophone population makes
California home to what is probably the United States' most extensive
regulation of names. The diacritic ban is one in a long legacy of
Official English policies in California which extends back to its
annexation into the United States.

History of language attitudes in California
-------------------------------------------

During California's 1848 annexation from México into the United States,
the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo promised equal rights to the
approximately ten thousand Californios (the original Hispanophone
community in the territory):

> Mexicans who, in the territories aforesaid, shall not preserve the
> character of citizens of the Mexican republic, conformably with what
> is stipulated in the preceding article, shall be incorporated into the
> Union of the United States, and be admitted at the proper time (to be
> judged of by the Congress of the United States) to the enjoyment of
> all the rights of citizens of the United States, according to the
> principles of the constitution; and in the mean time shall be
> maintained and protected in the free enjoyment of their liberty and
> property, and secured in the free exercise of their religion without
> restriction. [@guadalupe]

Enjoying \"all the rights of citizens of the United States\" did not
turn out to include protection of Spanish. Although the original state
constitution, promulgated with a full Spanish translation, provided for
publishing all legislation in both English and Spanish [@baron92],
@lamar-prieto14 notes that even in the state's early days there were no
Spanish courts, limiting legal representation for non-Anglophones. A
contemporary observer noted that \"si un Mexicano tiene por desgracia un
pleito en las cortes de este Estado está seguro de perderlo\"
[@lamar-prieto14 28]. Legislative bilingualism continued only until the
1879 constitutional revision, when even the limited recognition of
Spanish was discontinued, as supporters of the change reckoned that
\"California's Mexicans had had some thirty years to learn English\"
[@baron92]. The 1879 constitution marked a turning point in California's
linguistic history, as Spanish lost any claim to official status within
California [@baron92].

Proposition 63
--------------

The 1879 constitutional revision foreshadowed further \"Official
English\" measures in the twentieth century. Official English refers to
a political movement, beginning in 1980, which promotes the institution
of English as official language, at either the state or national level
[@liu14]. Supporters' motives vary widely, including the practical
necessity for immigrants to be conversant in English to nationalistic
arguments such as that the spirit of American democracy ought be
cherished in the original language of the Founders [@baron92 7].

In a 1986 referendum, Proposition 63, voters declared English
California's official language and created Article III, Section 6 of the
California Constitution, which cements the legal status of English and
grants enforcement powers to the state government:

> The Legislature shall enforce this section by appropriate legislation.
> The Legislature and officials of the State of California shall take
> all steps necessary to insure that the role of English as the common
> language of the State of California is preserved and enhanced. The
> Legislature shall make no law which diminishes or ignores the role of
> English as the common language of the State of California. [@ca-const]

Diacritical marks on birth certificates
---------------------------------------

With this historical context in mind, we come to our main focus
regarding California language policy, the longstanding restriction on
any diacritic characters from appearing in names on official documents.
Guidelines from the California Office of Vital Records (OVR) instruct
local agents that names may contain only the \"26 alphabetical
characters of the English language with appropriate punctuation if
necessary\" and that \"no pictograms, ideograms, diacritical marks
(including 'é', 'ñ', and 'ç') are allowed\" [@larson11]. The OVR
handbook actually cites Proposition 63's official English provision as
its justification for banning diacritics. We should note that other
government agencies interpret the law differently. Two California state
parks, Año Nuevo State Park and Montaña de Oro State Park, contain the
Spanish ñ in their official names, which is reflected on the parks'
official webpages [@año-nuevo] [@montaña-de-oro] [@larson11]. Likewise,
the City of San José, California includes the accented é in its official
name, and its Style Guide includes instructions on how to produce it
digitally: \"To create an accented é, hold down the alt key and type
'0233'‚ on the numeric key pad.\" [@san-josé]

Legislative initiatives
-----------------------

Two recent bills in the California Assembly attempted to address the
issue. AB-2528 sponsored by AM Nancy Skinner in 2014 \"required the
State Registrar to ensure that diacritical marks on English letters are
properly recorded on birth certificates, certificates of fetal death,
and marriage licenses, including, but not limited to, accents, tildes,
graves, umlauts, and cedillas\" [@ab2528]. The bill stalled in the
Appropriations Committee due to the high projected cost for IT upgrades.
For example, the Department of Motor Vehicles' software reportedly could
\"not even accept lower-case letters\" [@ab2528]. The County Recorder's
Association of California opposed the bill for the same reason.

In 2017, AM Jose Medina (his official Assembly website does not include
an é in his first name [@medina]) revived the issue with AB-82, which
ultimately passed both houses of the legislature before being vetoed by
Governor Jerry Brown, who again cited the high costs of upgrades. A
breakdown of those costs was presented in one committee hearing as
follows [@veto]:

-   \$230,000 for IT upgrades at Department of Public Health

-   \$2 million per year for Department of Public Health to correct
    existing records

-   Loss of revenue of \$450,000 per year to Department of Public Health
    since they would not be able to electronically transmit names to SSA
    (at \$3 per name) containing diacritics

-   Up to \$12 million for local governments to upgrade their systems

-   \$1--3 million in upgrades to Department of Health Care Services

-   Unknown administrative costs to Department of Social Services

The cost and compatibility issues with federal systems was the sticking
point for Governor Brown. His veto message argues that the costs and
risks are too great to justify the bill:

> \"Mandating the use of diacritical marks on certain state and local
> vital records without a corresponding requirement for all state and
> federal government records is a difficult and expensive proposition.
> This bill would create inconsistencies in vital records and require
> significant state funds to replace or modify existing registration
> systems.\" [@veto]

Remarks
-------

The common-law foundation of American naming law emphasises the
near-total right of parents to name their children as they wish
[@heymann11]. The type of statutory naming codes we will discuss later,
in Iceland and Latvia, are unlikely to occur in a common-law context.
Instead, any name which is not used for fraudulent or malicious purposes
should be accepted [@ferner96] [@finch08] [@heymann11]. California's
diacritic ban, however, should not be viewed as naming law in the
traditional common-law conception. It is instead an act of linguistic
policy pursuant to Proposition 63. That is, presumably nobody considers
the name María to be inherently incompatible with the denotative
function required by law for names. It is instead contrary to the
government's supposed interest in protecting the use of English in the
United States.

Both @larson11 and @foggan83 [598] find that child-naming must be
considered a \"constitutionally protected child-rearing decision\". This
places it in the purview of the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process
clause, which has been interpreted to include a \"right to privacy\" in
parental decisions[^2]. @larson11 notes that it is unclear what standard
courts should use in balancing individual rights against legitimate
state interests (eg. rational basis vs. strict scrutiny).

Considering the diacritic ban in California under Due Process would
entail recognising the inherent capacity of parents to make choices for
their children's names and cultural upbringings, keeping in mind the
common-law tradition of onomastic freedom. No legitimate state interest
could be raised based on the child's best interest for prohibiting the
use of names like José. If anything, it is in the child's best interest
to keep his or her cultural identity intact. Moreover, even the argument
of \"legibility\", or the interest of courts in maintaining the public
usability of names, is unsound, since Latin script names written with
diacritics are readily comprehensible to Californian Anglophones. There
is no legal requirement that *everyone* write the diacritic *every
time*. As @larson11 [191] notes, \"If Costco decides to record a
customer's name as 'Mendez' rather than 'Méndez', it is perfectly free
to do so, although it may annoy that customer\".

Even assuming that the stated goals of Proposition 63 are legitimate in
supporting English as the official language, the measure may not be
upheld, since it seems more designed to disenfranchise Spanish than to
bolster English: \"it is hard to see why permitting the name
'Changsurirothenothenom' while prohibiting 'Lucía' serves any state
interest in promoting the English language\" [@larson11 189]. Besides,
the ability of states to interfere in parents' private language
decisions is cast into doubt by the landmark 1923 Supreme Court case
*Meyer v. Nebraska*, which recognised the child's right to instruction
in a foreign language [@larson11] [@baron92]. The diacritic ban raises
similar problems, as giving children a properly spelled surname in the
heritage language is an aspect of passing on cultural heritage.

The First Amendment offers another vehicle for legal argumentation,
since name-giving is a form of speech. @larson11 notes that this line of
thought offers protection to a wider spectrum of names (eg. pets'
names). Note, however, the imprimatur argument of @heymann11. For
example, one court opinion found that \"Petitioner has a right under the
common law to assume any name that he wants so long as no fraud or
misrepresentation is involved ...once Petitioner files an application
for a name change ...and seeks the approval of the courts for a name, it
becomes the responsibility of the courts to ensure that there are no
lawful objections to the name change\" [@variable08] [@heymann11 413].

The remaining argument available to the state is that the computer
systems currently in use cannot handle the addition of diacritics and
that upgrades would be prohibitively expensive. Although the argument
has some force, in that governments may legitimately ensure the ability
of names to function properly in the public realm, diacritic marks do
not inhibit comprehension of the name and can always be omitted if
necessary for a particular application. For important records like birth
certificates, however, it seems counterintuitive that the technological
advancement in computing technology should turn out to limit individual
rights compared to handwritten and typewritten documents [@larson11
191]. Per the decision in [@ferner96], which upheld the legality of a
woman's name change to the single word \"Koriander\", \"computers and
record keepers need not control individual liberties\".

California is not alone among US states in banning diacritical marks, as
at least three others, Kansas, Massachussetts, and New Hampshire have
the same policy [@larson11]. Doubtless, additional states omit
diacritics as an unofficial administrative practice. California's
situation is notable for the huge number of people it affects in the
name-giving process, given the state's prominent Spanish-speaking
population and Mexican legacy. Even if California's Official English
provision (Proposition 63) is constitutional, the administrative
interference in naming contravenes private naming rights under Due
Process. For an international comparison, see below on Latvia, which
considers a similar question of private naming rights from the
perspective of human rights law.

China
=====

Introduction
------------

Given the People's Republic of China's diverse population and linguistic
landscape, language provides the state with an important vehicle for
pursuing cultural policies. The PRC has distinguished mainland Chinese
from the language of Taiwan via the simplification of Chinese script in
the 1950s, which reduced both the number and complexity of characters.
Moreover, mainland Chinese is distinctive for the standardised use of
Pīnyīn romanisation since 1958, vis-à-vis Taiwan, where competing
systems like Wade-Giles continue to to coëxist with Pīnyīn.

The Communist government has sponsored a nationwide Mandarin standard in
such bills as *Actively Promote the Beijing-based Putonghua as the
Standard Pronunciation* (1955) and *Law of the National Common Language
for the People's Republic of China* (2000) [@dong10]. Linguistic
intervention in favour of a standard language (Pǔtōnghuà: \"common
language\") puts both provincial Chinese dialects (Cantonese,
Shanghainese) and non-Chinese languages (Tibetan, Uyghur) at risk.
Pǔtōnghuà is thus \"enregistered\" as an \"accentless\" dialect
[@dong10], while regional dialects are in danger as upwardly-mobile
youth move to cities and adopt the standard variety.

Here we look at two recent naming cases in China, which stem from the
digitisation of the central identification system in the early 2000s and
evaluate how the policy aligns with the country's language policy in
general. This relates to the limitations of representing names in a
digital format but also reflects the homogenising effect of state
infrastructure. Here we see both the desire to propagate a standardised
and progressive Mandarin and to avoid the intrusion of global English.

Second-generation ID cards
--------------------------

China's Public Security Bureau instituted a digital system around 2004
to issue and track personal identification cards. The new IDs have an
embedded microchip with personal and security information and were
intended to improve the Bureau's population statistics and anti-forgery
protection [@ciicn04].

The change did not occur without drawbracks. The digital system caused
administrative hassle for many Chinese citizens with uncommon names.
Government computers (as of 2009) can only accommodate 32,252 Chinese
characters. If someone's name includes a character outside the list,
they are asked to change it [@lafraniere09]. A woman named Mǎ Chěng
(马𩧢) was one victim of this policy, as reported by @lafraniere09 for
*The New York Times*. Mǎ's grandfather scoured a classical Chinese
dictionary for a distinctive name and chose an obscure character, which
complemented the family name, mǎ (马) \"horse\". The given name he chose
was chěng (𩧢) \"gallop\" (the traditional form of 马 (馬) written three
times). Mǎ's previous ID card included a handwritten 𩧢, but the digital
system would not allow this. Thus the Bureau recommended she change her
name for compatibility purposes.

The open-ended nature of Chinese script makes it possible to find
legitimate characters that are barely comprehensible to the average
reader, due to their being uncommon or archaic. Most characters consist
of smaller radicals, which are themselves characters or derivatives
thereof. Thus the writing system is composite and open to internal
manipulation, unlike alphabetic systems. This fact can be viewed
positively or negatively.

As Chinese uses comparatively few surnames, some worry that name trends
will carry parents down into the Classical Chinese abyss, away from the
realm of mutual comprehension. For example, linguistics professor
interviewed for the @lafraniere09 article notes: \"The computer cannot
even recognize \[some names\] and people cannot read them. This has
become an obstacle in communication.\" On the other hand, Mǎ lived
satisfactorily with the name for twenty-six years. Whenever necessary,
she explained her name to people. Agencies were often willing to
accommodate the rare character by handwriting it, writing in pīnyīn,
searching the Unicode table, or even building the character themselves
with software [@martinsen08]. In the process, those whom Mǎ encounters
learn more about their own writing system and its history. This
give-and-take (in any naming society) is lost with the onset of rigid
administrative rules.

A similar situation occurred in the case of Zháo C (赵C) due to the
English letter that appears in his name. The Bureau ruled that only
Chinese characters may appear in names and refused to issue him a
second-generation card. Zháo and his father (a lawyer) appealed the
decision, arguing that 'C' appears in Pīnyīn romanisations and in the
tradenames of Chinese institutions like CCTV, the Chinese national
broadcasting service. Apparently the judge was unconvinced, as Zháo
volunatarily agreed to change his name, asking the public for their
suggestions [@martinsen09].

Remarks
-------

The government's treatment of Ma's name suggests an ambiguous
relationship with the Classical Chinese legacy. Promoting a nationwide
Pǔtōnghuà is presented in terms of the Confucian ideal of hé (和)
\"harmony\", under former President Hú Jǐntāo's Harmonious Society
programme [@wang16]. Yet the CPC's ongoing efforts to simplify and
control the Chinese script favours progress over stability and
apparently shuns the unifying force of the Classical past.

Although the letter 'C' is easily represented on Chinese computers, the
restriction on English letters in names intends to protect the Chinese
linguistic framework from Western encroachment. As such, China's
approach is actually typical of small countries protecting their
national language, as we see in the case of Iceland and Latvia. As Zháo
pointed out, infiltration of English into Chinese society (CCTV, for
instance) has occurred, despite the simultaneous spread of Pǔtōnghuà as
a hegemonic dialect in China. Of course, one might debate the relative
likelihood of Mandarin Chinese's obolescence at the hands of English.
Moreover, we note that China's specific ban on foreign influence in
names, contrasted with the relative lenience on matters like signs and
business names (\"CCTV\") suggests that names are considered very close
to \"the language itself\".

Thus China's naming policies appear in some senses contradictory,
attempting to counteract the looming threat of global English, but
simultaneously, as the world's largest country and language, attempting
to produce its own hegemonic environment as a unifying language for
China's many ethnic identities. Chinese must fight a two-front war
against both the past (conservative veneration of Classical Chinese) and
the future (global English), seeking a balance between the two
approaches.

Latvia
======

Introduction
------------

After the fall of the USSR, the new republics moved quickly to
legitimate their national languages and put them to use in all areas of
public life. As young nation-states, it was considered imperative to
assert a self-sufficient linguistic identity after years under the
influence of Russian. Moveover, the threat of Global English was
salient, with the US standing alone as the world's superpower after the
Cold War.

Latvia's constitution establishes Latvian as the official language
[@lat-const]. A 1999 law and associated regulations apply the law to
names, requiring that non-Latvian names be transcribed to conform with
Latvian spelling and grammar on official documents [@lat-lang]. This
policy was challenged under international human rights law on two
occasions: in the European Court of Human Rights in *Mentzen v. Latvia*
[@mentzen04] and under the International Covenant of Civil and Political
Rights in *Raihman v. Latvia* [@raihman10]. Although the two tribunals
reached different verdicts, the reasoning employed by the contending
parties and by the courts reveals insight into the role names play in
the language and in linguistic policy. The Latvian cases indicate that
the official ideology in Latvia embraces a conservative and literary
variety of the language as a national heritage and that the promotion of
an official state language is regarded as a legitimate function of the
modern state.

Language law in Latvia
----------------------

The Latvian Constitution, Chapter I, paragraph 4 states that \"the
Latvian language is the official language of the Republic of Latvia\"
[@lat-const]. This clause is specifically implemented by the Official
Language Law of 1999. The language law contains numerous provisions that
outline the use of Latvian in all areas of modern life. With respect to
personal names, section 19 says that \"names of persons shall be
presented in accordance with the traditions of the Latvian language and
written in accordance with the existing norms of the literary language\"
[@lat-lang]. This means that the authorities will Latvianise foreign
names when included on official documentations. Latvianisation includes
two processes, the addition of appropriate case endings (which depend on
gender) and the phonetic transcription of names into Latvian script.

We should note that the Latvian process of transcribing even names
already written in the Latin alphabet differs from the literal
reproduction used by most countries in this situation [@varennes15]. To
this end, regulation 96, 2002 on \"the transcription and use of names of
foreign origin in the Latvian language\" sets out in impressive detail
how names should be transcribed, including sections for each common
foreign language in Latvia with specific examples [@notei96]. For
instance, converting the name \"John Wright\" into Latvian produces
\"Džons Raits\", which retains the same phonetic value as the English
original and adds the obligatory masculine nominative suffix \"-s\".
Because of Latvian declension rules, males and females with the same
surname have different endings attached. According to the regulation,
President Hoover would be known as \"Hūvers\", while his First Lady
would go by \"Hūvere\". In the case of transcribed names, an earlier
resolution provides that the original form of the name may appear on the
passport with a certified stamp, if the person desires. The document
states that \"the form of the surname written in Latvian shall be
legally identical to the original form of the surname, the historical
form, or the form transliterated into Latin characters\" [@notei295].

*Mentzen v. Latvia*
-------------------

Juta Mentzen, a Latvian woman, married her husband in Bonn in 1998 and
took his German surname \"Mentzen\". In 1999, she requested a new
passport from the Latvian Interior Ministry, specifically asking that
her married name be transcribed literally. The request was ignored,
however, and she received a passport with the surname listed as
\"Mencena\", reflecting the Latvian use of 'c' to denote \[ts\] and the
feminine nominative suffix \"-a\". Pursuant to the regulations, the
original form was certified as \"Mentzen\" on a separate page of the
passport. Mentzen found little success appealing within the Latvian
court system for relief, although the Constitutional Court ruling
against her did specify that the \"original form\" should be moved from
page 14 to page 4 of the passport to be closer to the main page.

Apparently this did not satisfy Mentzen, who filed a complaint with the
European Court of Human Rights, claiming that Latvia had violated her
right to private and family life guaranteed by Article 8 of the European
Convention on Human Rights. This article prohibits interference by
authorities with this right except in accordance with the law and as
necessary for promoting the legitimate interests of the state [@echr].
It was admitted by all parties that an Article 8 interference had
occurred and that such interference was lawful, since it was set out
clearly in legislation and applied to all names equally. The legal
substance of the case was to determine whether promotion of the national
language by regulating names is a \"legitimate\" state function.

The Latvian government's defence of the law rested on the need to
preserve the structural integrity of Latvian and the desirability of
protecting the language after years of Soviet rule. They state in their
submission \"that Latvian had only been able to survive as a result of
the Latvian people's determination to carry on using and, to the extent
possible, to promote the use of their language\" [@mentzen04]. But
official Latvian ideology does not simply call for the use of Latvian in
any form. It specifically promotes the conservative literary form,
noting that the language laws \"aimed at protecting the right of others
to hear and use *correct*[^3] Latvian on Latvian territory\". Even the
practice of transcribing foreign names, Latvia claims, is an ancient
Latvian tradition, dating back to the first text published in Latvian,
*Parvus catechismus catholicorum* by Saint Cainisius in 1585. They also
claim that allowing literal transcription would threaten the case
system's integrity and threaten to degrade the language's
intelligibility: \"Systematically permitting names to be entered in
passports without endings would encourage people to use the same form in
conversation. Once such usage had become commonplace, it would open the
door to the deformation of the language and its deterioration on a vast
scale.\"

Mentzen countered on a number of linguistic grounds. As a living
language, \"Latvian could not be isolated from its environment\" and
\"was inevitably influenced by other languages\". Her reply notes that
foreign persons living in Latvia, such as her husband, tended not to
have their names transcribed. Moreover, she notes that foreign words and
institutional names commonly appear in Latvian media, while trademarks
including foreign words or names are permitted in non-Latvianised form,
even if they are sometimes placed in italics. As Latvian already has
indeclinable nouns, the concern raised by the government regarding a
communication breakdown is apparently unfounded, since speakers can
negotiate semantic roles based on context. She claims that she had
personally experienced difficulties from having a different surname from
her husband, complicating private transactions and travel abroad and
undermining her choice to be permanently identified with her husband's
family.

The Court decided in favour of the government, ruling that promoting
correct Latvian usage was a legitimate state function. They set out
their view of an official language as follows: \"A language is not in
any sense an abstract value. It cannot be divorced from the way it is
actually used by its speakers. Consequently, by making a language its
official language, the State undertakes in principle to guarantee its
citizens the right to use that language both to impart and to receive
information ...implicit in the notion of an official language is the
existence of certain subjective rights for the speakers of that
language.\"

Although the Court acknowledged interference with Mentzen's privacy,
they determined that the measure was necessary, legitimate, and
adequately tempered by Latvia's willingness to place the original form
of the name on the passport nearby the Latvianised form. Thus the ruling
claims that names can legitimately be used to promote linguistic
behaviours in public life.

*Raihman v. Latvia*
-------------------

The United Nations Human Rights Committee considered essentially the
same question as the European court, this time under the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The case was brought by Leonid
Raihman, a Latvian national and member of the Russian-Jewish minority.
Raihman used his name in the original form from the time of his birth in
the USSR until 1998, when Latvian officials granted him a new passport
with his name Latvianised as \"Leonīds Raihmans\", adding the masculine
nominative suffix *-s*. He achieved even less success in Latvian courts
than Mentzen, as he filed the complaint after her case had already
established precedent in the Constitutional Court. Taking his complaint
to the international level, he claimed that the Latvian policy
interfered with his rights under Article 17 of the Covenant, which
states that \"no one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful
interference with his privacy, family, home or correspondence\"
[@iccpr]. Latvia reiterated its defence from Mentzen that the policy was
lawful and appropriate to the goal of protecting Latvian usage.

The UN's decision differed with the ECHR's in finding that the policy
arbitrarily interfered with Raihman's privacy under Article 17, stating
that \"the Committee considers that the forceful addition of a
declinable ending to a surname, which has been used in its original form
for decades, and which modifies its phonic pronunciation, is an
intrusive measure, which is not proportionate to the aim of protecting
the official State language\" [@raihman10 8.3].

Remarks
-------

We should note that the two courts agree on most points of these very
similar cases. They concur that states may legitimately promote an
official language and that the interference in privacy presented by the
Latvian policy was lawful, stemming from legislation that sets out
general principles leaving little room for individual discretion on the
part of administrators. Moreover, both the ECHR and UNHRC admit that
Latvia's history of struggle under the Soviet régime and its strict case
system are particularities that must be taken into account for ensuring
the survival of Latvian.

However, ECHR determined that individuals' names were an appropriate
forum for pursuing public linguistic policy, while UNHRC felt that the
measure was unjustified. The UNHRC's favourable ruling for the
petitioner may be influenced by the Committee's prior establishment of a
\"right to choose and change one's own name\" under Article 17 of the
Covenant, which they easily extended to protect names from undergoing
\"passive\" changes by the State as well. Ultimately, these two cases
reveal that the line between acceptable and unacceptable regulations on
naming is constantly shifting and not yet clearly defined, even by human
rights scholars.

Iceland
=======

Iceland's naming system is distinctive for retaining its patronymic
(non-fixed) surnames and the government's maintenance of a Personal
Names Register for child-naming. Both policies reflect an insular
nationalism and Icelander's pride for their conservative North Germanic
language. Like Latvia, the Icelandic state actively promotes its
language occurs in a postcolonial context, asserting its unique heritage
out from the linguistic shadow of Danish rule. Controlling the spread of
modern-type fixed surnames, which threatened to displace the indigenous
patronymic system, was seen as a way of maintaining Icelandic identity
[@willson02]. The more recent institution of the Personal Names Register
also represents an effort to maintain the cultural and grammatical
structure of Icelandic. However, the appropriateness of Icelandic
regulations should be considered from the human rights perspective as
well, especially in the wake of the UN decision in Latvia discussed
above.

Icelandic nationalism and purism
--------------------------------

Nationalist and Romantic tendencies gained strength in Iceland in the
late nineteenth century in the context of Iceland's struggle for
independence from Denmark. Icelanders claimed their unique linguistic
heritage as one justification for political independence. The ideology
of linguistic purism went virtually unchallenged within the general
populace. @kristinsson12 notes that there was harmony between
\"practices, beliefs, and management decisions\" in language policy
during Iceland's period of peak nationalism between 1860 and 1960.

Icelandic linguistic policy shifted focus in the 1960s, when the state
created the Icelandic Language Council. The postwar presence of US
forces at a permanent military installation marked the symbolic
beginning of Anglophone cultural imperialism. @kristinsson12 interprets
the creation of the Council as a reaction to the more fragile position
of Icelandic and waning linguistic nationalism, as linguistic
policymakers sought to stem the tide of global cultural influence on
Icelandic.

Surnames debate
---------------

Although Icelandic faced an unprecedented global threat in the aftermath
of World War II, we should note that this phenomenon was foreshadowed
around the turn of the century in the debate over whether Iceland should
adopt modern fixed surnames, as most of Europe had already done. Even
during this time, linguistic purism was not maintained without any legal
intervention. One of Icelandic's salient characteristics is the
patronymic system of surnames. The majority of Icelanders take as a
surname their father's or mother's given name, in the genitive case and
with the appropriate \"-son\" or \"-dóttir\" suffix attached, depending
on gender.

[@willson02] notes that the preservation of this unique system was not
inevitable, and policymakers and linguists at the turn of the century
debated whether Iceland should adopt fixed surnames. Despite the
linguistic purism of much of Iceland's population, this debate was
responding to a real surge of Continental-style surnames in the
nineteenth century, as persons from the upwardly mobile class pursued
studies in Denmark or elsewhere in Europe and brought the practice home
to Iceland. Ultimately the spread of surnames was only prevented via
legal action.

The first attempt to limit surname adoption was an 1881 bill introduced
in the Alþingi (Icelandic legislature) instituting a tax on the adoption
of such names. The proposal would have required royal permission to
adopt a surname, and, if approved, would require the payment of five
hundred krónur; hereafter the nameholder would also be subject to an
annual title tax (\"nafnbótarskattur\") of ten krónur per syllable in
the name [@willson02 137]. This proposal was not approved, however, and
the debate raged on about what should be done.

To briefly summarise the debate presented in-depth by @willson02, we
note that the two camps roughly represented the modernist and
conservative perspectives. Writer Guðmundur Kamban presents an
internationalist defence of surnames (he himself used a fixed surname),
claiming that female Icelanders abroad will inevitably be referred to by
their husband's patronymic, creating a gender mismatch. Moreover he
praises the extreme morphological simplification of English as a sign of
linguistic development. Countering Guðmundur's forward-thinking
approach, the conservative line was carried by linguist Jóhannes
Jóhannsson, who touted the linguistic heritage of Icelandic and
suggested that, should surnames prove inevitable, they should be made
more harmonious with the language by incorporating authentic Icelandic
elements.

A law on the topic finally passed the Alþingi in 1913, levying a
moderate charge for surname adoption without any annual tax. A
government report in 1915, *Íslenzk mannanöfn* (Icelandic Personal
Names), carried on the work of Jóhannes in trying to develop an
Icelandic adaptation of modern surnames and went to great lengths to
justify their recommendations with sound philological argumentation.
Still, the report emphasised the need for modernisation, as the writers
chose not to include any surnames including the letter Þ, due to its
likelihood for corruption in foreign contexts.

Apparently this report stretched the linguistic purism of Iceland's
population to the breaking point. The report's suggestions were
ridiculed by writers as an indication that surnames were inherently
incompatible with Icelandic. The counterreaction was consummate in 1925,
when the adoption of new surnames was firmly forbidden by the Alþingi.
Although ultimately the patronymic system remained intact, the Icelandic
surname debate casts doubt on the inevitability of maintaining
Icelandic's purity. Legal intervention was necessary to control the
public's naming practices and prevent a structural change of the
national language.

Personal Names Committee
------------------------

A better-known aspect of Iceland's naming policy is the Personal Names
Committee (Mannanafnanefnd). The committee of three people maintains a
registry of permissible forenames that are \"capable of having Icelandic
genitive endings\", \"written in accordance with the ordinary rules of
Icelandic orthography\", and gender-conforming: \"girls shall be given
women's names and boys shall be given men's names\" [@isl-names]. If a
parent wishes to use a name absent from the list, they must petition the
Committee for approval. Along with their ruling (which is explicity
non-appealable under the Personal Names Act), the Committee publishes an
explanation of their decision. As a typical example of their reasoning,
\"Huxland\" was rejected in 2014 because there was no precedent for
geographical suffixes in given names (only in middle names!) and because
the suffix \"-land\" implies a neuter noun [@kyzer15].

The most famous case from the Naming Committee is that of Blær
Bjarkardóttir Rúnarsdottir, whose first name was rejected by the
Committee, since they classified it as a male name. However, the family
refused to back down and choose a new name. Thus the state applied the
generic forename Stúlka (\"girl\") to all of Blær's official documents,
including her passport. Iceland takes enforcement of naming policies
seriously. Only after arguing that the name Blær was used for a female
character in a popular Icelandic novel did Reykjavík District Court
allow the name to be used.

Human rights implications
-------------------------

Iceland's practice of labelling children as \"Stúlka\" (girl) or
\"Drengur\" (boy) if their parents do not comply with the Personal Names
Act raises concerns under human rights, as this could be considered
demeaning and disproportionate to the goal of supporting an official
language. A generic placeholder name is arguably no name at all, and
this would constitute a violation of Article 7 of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, which states that all to children have the right to
a name and to which Iceland is a signatory [@crc]. This being the most
bare-bones conception possible of naming rights, Iceland's violation
should be addressed by the international community.

In the light of the United Nations Human Rights Committee's decision in
[@raihman10], it is difficult to see how Iceland's policy, if challenged
in this forum, would not be struck down likewise. Like the case in
Latvia, Iceland's Personal Names Act circumscribes individuals' choice
of names in order to support the official language. Recalling that
Article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
encompasses the \"right to choose and change one's own name\", Iceland's
policy contravenes the state's obligations under this provision. Despite
Iceland's legitimate interest in protecting their national language, it
is imperative that linguistic management does not interfere with
individual freedoms.

Conclusion
==========

This paper presents four case studies on naming restrictions which
highlight the extent to which naming law aligns with official language
policy and how names are considered a venue for enacting linguistic
change. Although naming restrictions are common in today's bureaucratic
age, we consider the historical context of naming to underscore the
importance of protecting individual autonomy in naming. Although no name
should be an island---inaccessible for public use---it remains
ultimately the domain of the individual, as an expression of personal
identity.

The case studies chosen herein suggest two varieties of naming
restrictions with respect to language policy. The cases from the United
States and China are passive restrictions, deriving primarily from the
digital infrastructure chosen by the government. Although these systems
ultimately support the language policy (Proposition 63 for California
and Pǔtōnghuà for China), this primarily reflects the state
infrastructure that has been built to homogenise the linguistic
landscape, rather than a premeditated curating of names for linguistic
value. Neither Chinese nor English are in serious danger by the presence
of nonstandard names.

For the small nations in our sample, Iceland and Latvia, we do see a
self-conscious articulation of linguistic policy and a perception of the
threat to their national languages. Both governments see the form of
names as part of the language and necessary to maintain in their
traditional form. Small languages face a real threat of obsolescence and
marginalisation as \"heritage\" languages, having their active role in
public life circumscribed by a larger, especially colonial, language.
Both countries claim a need for linguistic purism, protecting the
traditional structure of the language. This serves as their rationale
for preventing onomastic innovation.

Despite the legitimate need to protect small national languages from the
onslaught of globalisation, this paper notes many legal considerations
of naming interference under both human rights and American law. Both
traditions prioritise the individual's right to choose names for
themselves and their children. Any proposed abridgement of this right
should be carefully reviewed to ensure that the measure is necessary and
effective for the aim sought. I hope that this paper establishes the
inherent connection between naming law and language policy, although
further work is needed to fully illuminate the relationship, apply it to
a wider range of jurisdictions, and classify the world's many naming
laws according to their relationship with language policy.

\printbibliography

[^1]: In the 1930s, officials in the Canadian North distributed
    serialised dog tags to Inuits, to alleviate identification
    difficulties due to their non-European names and nomadic
    lifestyles.[@scott02]

[^2]: A right to privacy is articulated explicitly in more modern human
    rights documents, such as Article 17 of the International Covenant
    on Civil and Political Rights [@iccpr].

[^3]: my emphasis
